Good morning, everyone. Thank you for having me.
I know 8am lectures are — let's say — an acquired taste.
Today we're going to talk about artificial intelligence in healthcare.
Not the science fiction version. The real, messy, imperfect version.
I want to start with a question I ask every new cohort at Stanford:
what problem are we actually trying to solve?
Because AI is not a solution. It's a capability.
And capabilities without clear problem statements are just expensive toys.
In healthcare, the problem statements are painfully clear.
Clinician burnout. Diagnostic error rates. Unequal access to specialist care.
Let me give you a number: radiologists review an average of
200 to 300 images per day in a busy hospital.
That's not reading a handful of scans carefully over a coffee.
That's sustained, high-stakes pattern recognition for eight-plus hours.
Fatigue degrades performance. We know this.
Error rates climb measurably in the final hours of a shift.
This is where AI offers something genuinely valuable —
not replacing the radiologist, but being the second pair of eyes that never gets tired.
The first clinical AI systems approved by the FDA were narrow.
Very narrow. One model, one task, one imaging modality.
IDx-DR, approved in 2018, detected diabetic retinopathy from retinal photographs.
That was it. Nothing else.
And that narrowness was a feature, not a bug.
You could validate it. You could audit it. You could trust the failure modes.
The field has since moved toward foundation models — large,
general-purpose models pre-trained on massive biomedical datasets.
Med-PaLM, BioGPT, ClinicalBERT — these can handle radiology reports,
clinical notes, genomic data, and patient history simultaneously.
That's extraordinarily powerful. It's also where the validation problem
becomes orders of magnitude harder.
How do you build a ground truth dataset for a model that operates
across five specialties and four data modalities?
Short answer: you don't. Not cleanly.
You build approximations, and you're transparent about their limits.
Let's talk about diagnostic AI specifically.
The benchmark everyone cites is the Stanford CheXNet paper from 2017.
A CNN trained on 100,000 chest X-rays outperformed
the average radiologist on pneumonia detection.
That headline traveled fast. What traveled less fast was the methodology critique
published six months later by Oakden-Rayner and colleagues.
The comparison was against radiologists operating under artificial constraints —
time pressure, no clinical context, no prior imaging.
In real clinical conditions, with access to patient history and prior scans,
the performance gap largely disappeared.
This is a pattern you will see repeatedly in this field.
Benchmark performance and clinical performance are not the same thing.
Distribution shift is probably the single most important concept
for anyone working on deployed medical AI.
A model trained at a well-resourced urban academic medical center
will see a very different data distribution than a rural clinic in Mississippi.
Different scanner manufacturers. Different patient demographics.
Different prevalence rates for the same conditions.
A model that performs at 94% AUC in your training environment
might degrade to 81% in deployment. That delta has clinical consequences.
I want to shift now to a domain where AI has had unambiguous,
well-documented positive impact: pathology.
Whole slide imaging combined with deep learning has transformed
how we approach cancer grading — particularly in prostate and breast cancer.
Gleason grading of prostate cancer is famously subjective.
Inter-observer agreement among expert pathologists is around 60 to 70 percent.
AI systems trained on large annotated slide libraries
have demonstrated agreement rates above 85% against expert consensus panels.
That's not replacing the pathologist.
That's giving every pathologist access to a second opinion grounded in thousands of cases.
The workflow integration question is where most implementations fail.
And I want to be honest with you about this.
You can build a technically excellent model and watch it gather dust
because it adds three clicks to an already overloaded clinical workflow.
Clinician adoption is a UX problem as much as an AI problem.
The best model in the world is useless if no one runs it.
I spent two years on an implementation project at UCSF.
We had a sepsis prediction model with genuinely strong performance metrics.
Alert fatigue killed it. Nurses were receiving 40-plus alerts per shift.
The sepsis alert became noise. Actionability collapsed.
We rebuilt the interface. Reduced alert volume by 60% through better thresholding.
Adoption recovered. Outcomes improved. Same model.
The lesson: deployment is a sociotechnical problem,
not a technical problem with some social considerations bolted on.
Now I want to address the equity dimension directly,
because it's often treated as a footnote and it should be a headline.
The 2019 Obermeyer et al. study in Science is required reading for this course.
If you haven't read it, read it this week.
They analyzed a widely deployed commercial algorithm used to allocate
care management resources to high-risk patients.
The algorithm used healthcare cost as a proxy for health need.
Black patients, at the same level of illness, generated lower costs.
Why? Systemic underutilization of healthcare due to access barriers,
historical mistrust, economic constraints.
The model learned the bias baked into the training data.
It then systematically under-referred Black patients for care management.
At scale. Across hundreds of hospitals. For years.
Before anyone caught it.
This is not a hypothetical. This is not a thought experiment.
This happened. It is documented. It is a warning.
Proxy variables are one of the most dangerous failure modes in applied ML,
and healthcare is saturated with them.
Any time you use a downstream outcome as a label —
readmission, cost, length of stay — ask what that outcome is a proxy for.
And ask who is underrepresented in the historical data
that generated those outcomes.
Let me close this section with something more optimistic:
large language models in clinical documentation.
Ambient AI scribes — models that listen to a patient encounter
and generate a structured clinical note — are in active deployment right now.
Nuance DAX, Suki, Abridge. Clinicians using these tools
report saving 60 to 90 minutes of documentation time per day.
That is time returned to patient care.
That is a direct, measurable reduction in burnout vector.
The accuracy challenges are real — hallucination in a clinical note
is a patient safety issue, not just an inconvenience.
But the human-in-the-loop model here is natural.
The clinician reviews and signs the note. The AI drafts. The human audits.
That's a workflow that maps well to how trust in AI-assisted systems
should be built incrementally.
We'll pick up after the break with drug discovery and genomics.
Questions so far? Yes — go ahead.